---
todo: true
title: Why I Would Not Get a Facebook Phone
date: '2013-04-03'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2013/04/03/why-i-would-not-get-a-facebook-phone/

categories:
  - General Blog
---
<a href="http://45.55.182.154/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/wpid-Photo-Apr-4-2013-540-AM.jpg" target="_blank" style="clear: right; float: right; margin-bottom: 1em; margin-left: 1em;"><img src="http://45.55.182.154/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/wpid-Photo-Apr-4-2013-540-AM.jpg" id="blogsy-1365068904375.9639" class="alignright" width="172" height="196" alt="" /></a>

I read an [interesting
article](http://www.cnn.com/2013/03/29/tech/mobile/facebook-phone-mashable) this
morning on CNN about why it wouldn't be a good idea for Facebook to release its
own branded phone right now. The author argues that the time for a Facebook
phone has passed. Earlier, Apple was out in front, and the Android platform was
weaker. Facebook's mobile apps also stunk. It would have been feasible to create
a customized Android platform that delivers a stellar Facebook experience and
use the Facebook name to jump right into second place and start the war for
first. Now, Android has grown much stronger under Samsung's wing, and Facebook
has fixed its mediocre mobile experience by launching native apps. There's
really no need for a Facebook phone now.

That's a perfectly valid argument, but I have my own. Thinking of a Facebook
branded smartphone gives me the same feeling I had when Google+ was released.
Google+ social results started showing up on top of normal search results, you'd
get prompted to merge your Google+ info with your YouTube login, and then one of
my friends pointed out that the was no way to opt out of Google+ when signing up
for a new Gmail account.

Google+ was becoming _pervasive_. The changes made Google feel very sketchy in
terms of how much respect they had for your personal information and it really
turned me off to the company in general. Google+, Facebook, and others are just
services that I use. I don't use them every hour of every day. I don't really
want them around when, for example, I'm trying to look something up for work and
I just happen to be doing it on my phone or tablet. When I get busy, social
media is one of the first things that falls to the wayside until I have some
free time.

Younger generations are probably different. Many people in my generation are
probably different. For me, though, I like the services that I use like social
media, news readers, and email, to stay in their own little sandboxes. Sandboxes
that I choose to visit on my own terms, and are safely stowed away when I don't
need or want them. I let Apple get its iHooks into me, sure, but I want my
devices to be service agnostic when it comes to social media. If a Facebook
phone is in the cards, it won't be in my deck.
