---
title: Buzz words
date: '2008-11-02'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2008/11/02/buzz-words/

categories:
  - Technology

excerpt: |
  Having just attended Microsoft's PDC 2008, including the introduction of the
  new Azure services platform, I don't think I ever want to hear the word
  "cloud" again. Buzz words like "cloud computing," "extensible services," and
  many more can be useful but more often than not I think they have a negative
  impact on developers. These effects can be seen both outside and inside the
  development department.

---
Having just attended Microsoft's PDC 2008, including the introduction of the new
Azure services platform, I don't think I ever want to hear the word "cloud"
again. Buzz words like "cloud computing," "extensible services," and many more
can be useful but more often than not I think they have a negative impact on
developers. These effects can be seen both outside and inside the development
department.

The first example that comes to mind is what's going to happen to many companies
when upper management finds out about "the cloud." Of course they're going to be
excited and they're going to "need" to have it, because all of the customers are
going to want it. Of course neither upper management nor the customers will know
anything about "the cloud." Buzz words in software development create a lot of
undue excitement in people that don't understand the underlying technology or
concepts. This can result in a lot of undue pressure on the development team as
they either rush to meet management's demands or spend hours trying to explain
to management why this new technology is irrelevant to their particular problem
space. Another effect that buzz words can have on a software company is that the
sales staff can latch onto buzz word laden phrases and use them in their sales
pitches, unaware that the features described by the buzz words aren't actually
in the system. This can lead to features being included in the system because a
promise of functionality was made, completely derailing development schedules
and estimates. It can also result in lawsuits when the customers find out that
they didn't get what they ordered.

Even within the development team, the misuse or overuse of buzz words can have
an adverse effect. The ambiguity introduced by buzz words can result in
miscommunication within the department when two developers, both using the same
buzz words, actually have two separate ideas in mind. How many variations of
cloud computing can you think of? In addition to the miscommunication of
knowledge, buzz words can actually result in a lack of knowledge. After hearing
a buzz word or catch phrase used relentlessly to describe a number of variations
on a single technology, a developer may decide the concept is simply too
complicated and never pick up a book about it. More often than not, if he or she
did pick up a book on the subject, he or she would discover that the buzz word
was only a fancy name for a simple and straightforward concept.

In the end, buzz words are a necessary evil. They get people excited about new
technologies and provide customers with a symbol they can recognize and
understand (or at least think they understand). Buzz words, when used properly,
can also help developers talk to each other about complicated concepts using a
smaller vocabulary. All the same, the misuse or overuse of buzz words hampers
communications on many levels and should definitely be avoided. Choose your buzz
words with care.
