---
title: Mandatory Programming Education
date: '2008-10-06'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2008/10/06/mandatory-programming-education/

categories:
  - Programming
---
I recently read
[this article](http://weblog.infoworld.com/fatalexception/archives/2008/10/mandatory_compu.html)
at InfoWorld which discusses the idea of requiring students at the middle or
high school level to learn how to program. The author, Neil McAllister, cites
the increasing need for basic computer literacy in our technology-dependent
world. While I agree that computer literacy is of critical importance today, I
don't entirely agree that courses on programming are the way to get there, at
least not the way programming courses are taught currently.

There are plenty of programming concepts that can help someone understand how
computers work, but there are just as many (if not more) that will not. Learning
about linked lists (a topic that was covered in my own high school programming
class) will not unlock any of the mysteries of using a computer more
effectively. Understanding the concept of a boolean value and how such values
are the building block of everything a computer does, on the other hand, could
very well help someone see more clearly how complex things like operating
systems and spreadsheet applications function.

I think the main thing that gives programmers and advantage over other people in
relating to computers is that their knowledge of programming concepts and
constructs allows them to guess at what a program is doing "behind the scenes."
In situations where a program is not behaving normally or throwing numerous
prompts at the user, a programmer usually has an idea of what the program might
"want" in order to get it to return to normal operation.

The key, then, to using programming as a tool for teaching computer literacy is
to separate the concepts that provide insight into the workings of computer
hardware and software from the ones that simply teach you how to write code.
Basic concepts like if, then, and else statements, for loops as well as more
complicated structures like stacks and queues can help explain the normal
functions of a computer. The code required to implement a stack is not important
in that context.
