---
title: Sinking the Titanic
date: '2009-07-06'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2009/07/06/sinking-the-titanic/

categories:
  - Software Engineering
---
Imagine, for a moment, that you are Poseidon, god of the oceans. The RMS Titanic
is sailing in your waters, and you don't like that. You decide that you want to
sink the Titanic and make an example of her for other sailors of the world, so
you order your minions to construct a giant iceberg that will crack her hull and
sink her.

Your minions set to work, and you don't watch them very closely. "They know what
they're doing," you think to yourself. As the time nears when the Titanic will
pass the spot where you've constructed the iceberg, you decide to review your
minions' work, and you are disappointed at what you see: a small spike sticking
up out of the water. Furious, you order them to make it bigger, grander, truly
fitting of the punishment you wish to bestow upon the ship. The minions, of
course, comply with your wishes and construct an iceberg that towers above the
waves and extends many leagues deep beneath them; an imposing presence indeed.
You wait for the Titanic to come and, to your dismay, the Titanic navigates
around your iceberg.

Unfortunately, you had neglected to think that, if the iceberg was large enough,
the crew on the Titanic would notice it far in advance, identify it as a threat,
and simply sail around it. Your minions, who really did know what they were
doing in the first place, point out that the part of the iceberg that floats
above the water must be small enough so that it doesn't look like a threat.

Beaten, but not defeated, you decide to try again. This time, armed with the
knowledge of how to trick the Titanic into sailing into your iceberg, you decide
to keep a much closer eye on the progress of the iceberg. Your minions again set
to work but, as you look down on the water from above, you do not even see an
iceberg. You call your minions back and lecture them, demanding to see some
results before the Titanic approaches. By the time you finish lecturing them,
you can see the steam from the Titanic's engines emerging over the horizon. You
quickly describe to your minions exactly what the iceberg must look like to the
crew on the ship so that they will not attempt to evade it. Bound to your will,
the minions do as they are told, creating a small and innocuous looking iceberg,
and not paying any attention to the part beneath the surface. The Titanic, not
disturbed by the size of the iceberg, ploughs straight through, shattering the
iceberg and continuing on its journey.

Once again, you fail in your objective. Your minions, as knowledgeable as ever,
remind you that the hull of the ship is strong, and it will take an iceberg with
a large strong base to crack it.

On your third attempt, you calmly and patiently describe in detail how the
iceberg must be constructed: small on the surface so that the Titanic will not
sail around it, but large and strong underneath the surface so that it will be
able to crack the ship's hull. You minions, who are probably getting tired of
building icebergs at this point, set to work once again. As you watch nervously
from the surface, you take their word that they are working hard on the
iceberg's base, the part that you can't see. As the Titanic approaches, the
iceberg's structure breaches the surface. Confident that the base is strong
enough to crack the ship's hull, you watch as your minions put the finishing
touches on the visible portions of the iceberg.

You watch anxiously as the Titanic approaches, and breathe a sigh of relief as
the hull splits open. Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet get to have their big
scene, and everyone is happy - in a manner of speaking.

The moral of the story is that you, as Poseidon, must understand the
requirements that the visible part of the iceberg must meet to attract the ship,
ensure that the infrastructure of the iceberg is strong enough to crack the
hull, and trust your workers to build the iceberg correctly.

The moral of the story, as far as software is concerned, is that in order to
design good software you must fully understand the requirements of your project
in order to meet the needs of the stakeholders, ensure that the infrastructure
under the surface of the application is strong enough to get the job done, and
trust your team to build it right.
