---
title: 'Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftmanship'
date: '2009-09-15'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2009/09/15/clean-code-a-handbook-of-agile-software-craftmanship/

categories:
  - Programming
---
### Author: Robert C. Martin

### ISBN: 0132350882

_Clean Code_ is a fantastic exploration of what we can do to make our code
manageable, readable, and understandable.  Few people realize how important this
truly is until it is too late.  This usually happens years after the code was
initially written when a change needs to be made.  The developers (which may
even include the original author) open the old code only to find that none of
them understand what is going on and, even if they did understand it, the code
doesn't lend itself to any kind of modification.  This typically happens because
functions are enormous, performing more than one action or relying on conditions
outside of themselves.  _Clean Code_ provides the tools to avoid these pitfalls
early on, so that looking at old code, while perhaps never a joy, can at least
be tolerable.

The chapters in the first half of _Clean Code_ cover a wide variety of
concepts.  From topics as simple as good variable naming practices to a
discussion of the [Law of Demeter](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Law_of_Demeter),
Martin gives the reader all of the tools necessary to evolve a messy tangle of
code into a clean and elegant product.

The second half of the book focuses on the process of applying the knowledge
from the first half.  Martin walks the reader through a series of refactorings
on a real piece of code and even demonstrates the added flexibility that is
gained through the process.

_Clean Code_ is an excellent resource for anyone that writes code.  I found that
it gave me a greater appreciation for the process of writing code, and a keener
eye for spotting trouble areas in existing code.
