---
title: 'Worst Practices: Thinking You are Done Learning'
date: '2010-07-20'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2010/07/20/worst-practices-thinking-you-are-done-learning/

categories:
  - Software Engineering
---
In the field of software engineering, you are _never_ done learning. That should
probably be one of the first ten rules of the profession.

Software engineering is still a young discipline. We can contrast it with
something like bridge building, for example. Humans have been building bridges
for thousands of years, and they pretty much fall into a few main categories
such as suspension bridges and truss bridges. At this point, we know how to
build bridges so that they don't fall down.

Humans have only been building software for a decade or two. There are a ton of
different methodologies out there for building software, compared to the
relatively few different types of bridges. Unfortunately, we don't really know
how to build software so that it doesn't crash. We know how to make crashes less
likely, of course, but every system of any significant size experiences crashes
at some interval.

Imagine if, in the first few decades of bridge building, people just decided to
stop advancing the discipline - decided they were done learning. What would the
result be? We might have bridges that fall down once or twice a year. How
frustrating would it be to deal with detours and alternate routes while the
bridge was repaired? Some people, those with the same mindset as the bridge
builder who was done learning, would simply accept this as a fact of life. Truly
bright individuals, however, would continue to study bridge structure and find
ways to make bridges that last.

The analogy is a bit of a stretch, but the point is that we cannot afford to be
complacent with the state of the art. Software engineering is a baby, and we all
need to help it grow by studying continuously to improve it, and passing our
knowledge on to the next generation. They will continue where we left off. This
is a discipline whose true shape will be molded not over years, not over
decades, but over lifetimes of study and practice.
