---
title: 'Worst Practices: Anti-Social Networking'
date: '2012-02-26'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2012/02/26/worst-practices-anti-social-networking/

categories:
  - Soft Skills
---
**Pro Tip:** If you have a company Twitter account, use it for more than
blasting out self-serving advertisements. You are wasting the perfect
opportunity to connect with your customers, improve their experience, and
address their complaints and concerns!

Want to see an example of what not to do? Check out
[@GNCLiveWell](http://www.twitter.com/gnclivewell). It's not "bad," or "wrong"
per se, but GNC is missing out on a huge opportunity to connect with its
customer base. Just take a look at this timeline snapshot.

{:.text-center}
<img
  src="{{ '/assets/img/2012/gnc_timeline.png' | relative_url}}"
  alt="@GNCLiveWell's Timeline"
  class="img-fluid"
/>

This is from the feed that shows every tweet from the @GNCLiveWell account,
including any @messages sent to other users. **Notice how there aren't any**.
Looking through the timeline, I see some RTs here and there, and some tweets
that are just general "rah rah" type stuff. This type of message blasting is
appropriate for somebody like GNC, in moderation of course. They're out to get
people motivated and active. I think that part of their timeline is great.

Here is where I start to have an issue, though. Take note of the number of
bit.ly links going on in that timeline snippet. Almost all of them link to a
product page on GNC's web site. I'd say more than half of the tweets from this
account are designed as one-way communication in the form of advertisements.
Again, none of this is **bad**, every brand name Twitter account is going to do
some advertising, but honestly there's not much reason to follow an account like
this if there is no two-way communication taking place. Brands like GNC should
care about this, because without followers nobody sees your tweets!

---

{:.text-center}
<img
  src="{{ '/assets/img/2012/garyvee_timeline.png' | relative_url }}"
  alt="@garyvee's Timeline"
  class="img-fluid"
/>

On the other side of things, look at [@garyvee](http://www.twitter.com/garyvee).
Gary Vaynerchuck is an entrepreneurial business development guru (also a wine
expert), and he is one of my favorite personalities on the Internet. At least
75% of his tweets are conversations with people, true interactions. This is how
you build strong relationships with your customers, this is how you get
followers, and this is how you leverage a social networking service like Twitter
effectively! Gary has published two successful business development books
focusing on social media and the evolution of its role in business; he also has
a great business selling wine on [winelibrary.com](https://winelibrary.com). All
of this is heavily supported by his use of social media outlets such as Twitter,
Tumblr, Facebook, and numerous others.

I'll end with this last point. At the time of writing, @GNCLiveWell has
**80,614** followers; @garyvee has **918,974**.
