---
title: What PowerShell Summit Showed Me
date: '2015-04-25'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2015/04/25/what-powershell-summit-showed-me/

categories:
  - Technology
---
PowerShell Summit was a blast. I learned some great new skills and connected
with a ton of folks who are as passionate about technology as I am. But even
though PowerShell Summit is a conference about Windows PowerShell, attending it
opened my eyes to some other important lessons that apply to everyone in IT.

## Focus On Your Career, Not Your Job

Whether you love your job or hate it, you should always be learning new
technologies based on what is best for you, not your company. Learn the things
that make you a valuable professional and you'll be in a good position no matter
what happens.

Does that mean you should ignore the skills that you need to do your actual job?
Absolutely not. Those are important too as long as you intend to keep that job.
But if yourÂ company's direction and your personal growth path don't line up,
it's up to you to invest your own time and money to make it happen.

## Keep An Eye On the Direction Of the Industry

To focus on the skills that make you a valuable professional, you have to know
what skills are (and will be) the most valuable to have. Not everyone has the
vision to see where the industry is going long term. If that's the case for you
(like it is for me), you've got to find the people who have that vision and get
tuned in. Stay up to date on their blog, follow them on Twitter, and look for
opportunities to hear them speak at conferences or on podcasts.

Many of the speakers at PowerShell Summit talked about what is coming in the
future of IT. Some of them were among the Microsoft employees building that
future. Listening to them blew my mind. What is coming, especially with Nano
Server and Windows Containers, will be shaping the future of our industry in big
ways. I will be listening to what they have to say.

## Participate In the Community, and Give Back

Microsoft has open sourced a ton of code on GitHub, and there is a thriving
community contributing to those projects. IT Professionals have a growing voice
that can shape the tools that we will be using for years to come. If you want to
stay relevant and be involved in the future of IT, you have to get involved in
that conversation.

Now I know not everyone can code, and you might feel like that means you can't
get involved, but you're wrong. I'm a guy that _can_ code, but I know absolutely
nothing about Active Directory, for example. That's where you can help. You can
provide domain expertise to people who don't have it. You can participate in
user groups and share your knowledge. You can exercise the technical previews
that Microsoft releases and provide feedback. **Anyone** can find a role, and
all of these things have to happen for us to collectively succeed in growing the
industry.

---

I'm so excited to see what's going to happen in IT in the next five years. I'll
be studying hard to stay up to date, and working to find a place in the
community where I can give back and help others. How about you?
