---
title: Tips for Cross Cultural Communication with Worldwide Partners
date: '2017-06-20'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2017/06/20/tips-cross-cultural-communication/

excerpt: |
  Working globally, I participate in cross cultural communication all the time.
  I've put together some tips for making this communication more effective.

categories:
  - Soft Skills
---
Working as a consultant, I get to interact with a wide variety of people. This
includes clients and partners in other countries across the globe. As such, many
of the people I work with come from a different culture, or do not speak English
as their first language. This cross cultural communication can present unique
challenges. I always take extra care and do whatever I can to overcome these
barriers. Here, I've collected some tips to make cross cultural communication
more effective.

## Be mindful of time differences

When I'm on a conference call with international participants, I always keep in
mind what time of day it is for each participant as I open and close the
conversation. Sure, at first it might feel weird saying "Good afternoon" to
someone when the sun hasn't come up yet, but you get used to it. And, whether
they mention it or not, people appreciate the consideration. It's a simple
gesture that shows you have empathy, and the ability to view the world from
another person's perspective.

## Be extra courteous

Another thing to keep in mind when working with people from across the globe is
your level of courtesy. This is especially true for Americans since our culture
tends to be very informal. What might be a normal tone for talking to another
American might be disrespectful to someone from a different culture.

There is a motto I often borrow from a former coworker that states, "Courtesy
and discretion in all forms of communication." I try to observe this not only in
cross cultural communication, but in any work-related communication I have.

## Avoid idioms

When we write and speak, we frequently use idioms to get our point across. For
example, if I'm putting lots of hours into a project but not making much
progress, I might say that I'm "spinning my wheels" on it. Other American
speakers will know what that means. Some folks from other cultures might, as
well. But, still others might be confused about the meaning, especially if
English is not their first language.

To remind myself how confusing idioms can be across cultures, I think of a
phrase I learned in high school Spanish: "El mundo es un Pañuelo." The literal
translation of this phrase is, "The world is a handkerchief." Do you have any
idea what that means? It makes no sense unless you've heard it before and
learned its meaning. Then, you would understand that it's the Spanish equivalent
of saying "What a small world!" when you run into someone unexpectedly.

## Remember, not all holidays are global

When there's a holiday, I love having a day off from work. Sometimes even the
day before the holiday is like a break. Hardly anyone comes into the office.
Nobody responds to e-mails. It can be very relaxing. But, when you've got
clients and partners in other countries, it's important to remember that not
everyone celebrates the same holidays.

For example, when Thanksgiving is approaching in America, some of our clients
would be surprised to see us disappear for two days, then talk about food for
the next week. That's why it's important to be proactive and remind our global
partners of any upcoming holidays. Cross cultural communication necessarily
requires us to be more actively engaged.

The non-universality of holidays also goes both ways. Just as it helps to greet
partners in Singapore with the opposite time of day (there is an 11 or 12 hour
time difference), it is also a wonderful gesture to wish your friends in India a
happy Diwali. Wishing folks well as they celebrate holidays is a polite and
respectful gesture. It is always welcome in a business context. Sure, it may
take extra effort to remember the holidays you don't personally celebrate, but
it's worth it.

---

These are things I've taught myself through observation. I'm certain they are
not the only useful tips for engaging in cross cultural communication. What
other pieces of advice do you have for people working with global partners?
Please share in the comments section!
