---
title: How to convince people you’re not there to automate them out of a job
date: '2018-12-07'
author: Adam

layout: post

permalink: /2018/12/07/how-to-convince-people-youre-not-there-to-automate-them-out-of-a-job/

excerpt: |
  When your job is automation, people sometimes think you're trying to put them
  out of a job. Here are some of the ways I fight that perception.

categories:
  - Soft Skills
---
As a consultant focused on optimization and automation, I’m often met with
resistance from individuals at my clients. These individuals are afraid I’ve
been sent there to replace them with a PowerShell script, leaving them without a
job. Here are some of the things I do, and you can too, if you ever need to
convince someone you’re not there to automate them out of a job.

## Don’t be there to automate them out of a job

No, seriously. Always be clear, both in your mind and with your client, what
your job is. You’re there to bring the client success on a project with a
clearly defined scope. Everything else is secondary, including who keeps their
job at the end of the day. Communicating this is important to keep people from
feeling like you’re actively trying to undermine them. __At worst, you’re
indifferent.__

Now, that may not sound too encouraging, but we’re just getting started.

## Listen and understand

Every person you work with at the client has knowledge that needs to be applied
in the solution you’re building. Folks will guard that knowledge, angrily at
times, if they feel it’s the only value they bring to the table. That’s why you
need to go deeper.

When you’re working with the client to learn about their current processes and
solutions, look beyond the knowledge itself to understand the strengths of the
people that built and manage them. Here, you can do two things:

1. Compliment and draw attention to people’s intrinsic strengths, and
2. Start thinking about how people can leverage their strengths in the new
   solution you’re building.

What you’re doing here is shifting the perceived value from the knowledge to the
individual. The old knowledge will become obsolete, but talented individuals can
apply their skills towards any solution.

## Provide a path forward

As you design your solution, remember what you’ve learned about your peers at
the client. Actively look for appropriate places to involve them. Engage them on
calls and ask their opinions.

You’ll be showing them unfamiliar things. But, if you choose things that fit
their strengths, you’re giving them a study guide on how to remain valuable to
their company.

## Accept that you can’t control others

You’ve actively engaged with the client. You’ve done your best to provide a
place for everyone moving forward. That’s great! But, never forget that your
primary focus is the project. Everyone else must choose individually whether
they want to put forth the effort to grow or get left behind.

There may be folks that choose to remain stationary. You have to accept their
decision and continue to focus on the project’s success. If you try to push
people down a path they have no interest in following, they'll only respond with
greater resistance.

---

Does all this require extra effort on your part? Absolutely. But, it’s worth it.
A large part of a project’s success is derived from the perception of success
from those involved. That’s why it’s crucial to have as many allies as possible
on the client side of the project team.

Obviously I can’t promise this approach will work every time. But, if you apply
these steps with transparency and honesty, you’ll greatly ease the tension
surrounding the people whose jobs are the most impacted by your project.
